JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn our
focus to politics now, from
tensions inside the White House
to pulling out of
the Paris accord.
And we break it all
down with Matt Schlapp.
He is chair of the American
Conservative Union.
And Karine Jean-Pierre, a
senior adviser to MoveOn.org.
And welcome back to both of you.
So, let's be crassly
political here.
We talked earlier, Matt, in
the program about the substance
of the president's decision.
MATT SCHLAPP, Former
White House Director of
Political Affairs: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
the pushback on it.
What was the political calculus
behind this, do you think?
MATT SCHLAPP: You look
at all these polls.
Most polls will tell you that
Americans supported the idea
of fighting climate change.
But that's really not
right the question.
It's digging down deeper.
The real question about climate
change is, are they willing
to pay more to fill their
tank with gas?
Are they willing to pay more
for their utility bills?
Are they willing to take some
of this American energy -- we're
now the world's leading supplier
of energy -- and take
it offline, which has a
big impact on U.S. jobs?
That's the real question.
By the way, it cuts
across party lines.
Most Americans think that what
they're asking them to pay for,
for this crusade on climate
is simply not worth losing
jobs or paying more for energy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It makes
it sound like a winning
decision today, Karine.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE,
Democratic Strategist:
I think what happened
today, what we saw today,
what Donald Trump did was
-- it was a political play.
That's all it was.
It wasn't about the economy.
It wasn't about the environment.
It wasn't about businesses.
It was purely about that
small, shrinking base that he
has that he needs to placate
with -- when it comes to every
tweet, every action, every
message that he puts out, it's
all about them.
He continues to give them the
red meat that he feels that
they need, and that's what we
saw.
And, if anything, we really
saw Steve Bannon winning the
day with that speech as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, is there
any risk, political risk, in
what the president did, Matt?
MATT SCHLAPP: Sure.
Sure.
I think, if it is
about politics, people
will see through that.
I actually think it's
something deeper.
It's a campaign promise he made
to the working men and women
across this country who have
not seen their economic
prospects improve.
You see that in poll after poll.
I think it's the number
one reason Donald
Trump is president,
and that his number one
gauge of his success is if the
economy can get chugging and
we can make these folks feel
and actually know
that their economic
prospects are improving.
If he can't do that,
I think he's going to
have political trouble.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Can I just
add, Judy, there is a poll --
speaking of a poll, there's
a poll that shows 70 percent
of Americans actually agreed
with the Paris accord; 55
percent were Republicans.
So, there were Americans who
were behind, behind this.
MATT SCHLAPP: But if you dig
deeper, the real political
question is, are you willing to
pay the higher taxes, the
credits and all the things that
you have to do to make carbon
more expensive to
take it off the grid?
And that's where it gets
dicey for your side.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Well, I
think the bigger question is
our planet and what are we going
to leave our children with --
you have five kids, I have a
kid -- and our grandchildren
with, if we don't take actually
responsibility to what this
country, our country is doing
to the climate?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's also
talk about what has been
happening inside the White House
now.
A lot of suspense built up
today over what the president
was going to this, at a time
when there's been a lot of
reporting about unsettled -- the
unsettled nature of how things
are going now with the staff.
MATT SCHLAPP: I haven't
read any of that.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
it's been in a couple
of news organizations.
Let me put it that way.
You talk to people
in the White House.
MATT SCHLAPP: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is
that overblown?
MATT SCHLAPP: No.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are people
feeling -- OK, what is going on?
MATT SCHLAPP: No,
it's not overblown.
And my belief is that the
president is impatient
over the fact that
there's been some bungling
on some of these rollouts
and some of these decisions.
There's been way
too much leaking.
There is always leaking
in White Houses, but
this is a journalist's
dream come true, because
you have 18, 20, 22 people
talking for stories.
It's out of control.
And I think he knows
it needs to tighten up.
And I believe that he's
communicated internally that
he expects it to tighten up.
And if it doesn't get
better -- and he has
got to up his game, too.
If it doesn't get better,
I think he's going to
make a lot more changes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Karine,
what is -- I mean, is this just
all an upside for Democrats,
if the president continues to
have these kinds of issues, or
are Democrats basically just
watching from the sideline?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: I think
we just watch on the sideline.
I think he's his worst enemy.
I mean, look, when it
comes to situations like
this -- and you know.
You have worked for a president.
I have worked for the president.
The fish really
rots at its head.
This is Donald Trump's
responsibility.
There is no one else
to blame but himself.
He's the one that tweets
off-message, not his staff.
He's the one that says things
that doesn't make sense that
really angers a lot of people,
including, you know, people
who even voted for him are a
little concerned about what
he's doing.
And we see that in focus groups.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When you say
he needs to up his game, your
words, what did you mean?
MATT SCHLAPP: Yes.
Well, look, there's an
independent counsel.
There's an
investigation going on.
He's got to be careful about
how he talks about that.
My advice is for the White
House is simply go along
with the investigation.
Do not comment on
the investigation.
Don't do anything that makes
it look like you're putting any
pressure on the investigation.
I understand the president
and his team are frustrated
because they don't see any there
there.
But I think they
need to do that.
I think, as far as the staff is
concerned, I think it was absurd
that the Russian delegation
was able to go into the
Oval Office with recording
devices and cameras.
They didn't know who was
going to get the photos.
The Keystone Cops
part of this must end.
With an outsider president and
an investigation going on, the
staff has to be twice as good,
and they can't afford to
make these kind of mistakes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Karine,
no matter what is going on
in the White House, if Donald
Trump's base, the people who
voted for him, like the basics
of what he's doing, whether
it's the climate decision or,
I don't know, his attempts
to set up a travel ban, even
though that hasn't
happened yet, does it
really matter politically
whether the White House
is -- quote --
"dysfunctional" or not?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: I think
it will at some point.
I mean, there's 2018 coming
right around the corner.
And that's going to hurt
Republicans, what we see Donald
Trump doing, because it's not
just Republicans.
It's not that small base that
got him to the White House.
It was also Democrats
and independents that got
him into the White House.
MATT SCHLAPP: That's true.
(CROSSTALK)
MATT SCHLAPP: And, by the way,
he has a lot of them on his
staff at the White House, too.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Right.
But here's the thing.
If you look at the House in
some of these suburbs that they
have to win, the Republicans
have to win, you need support
outside of your Republican base.
So, it is going to hurt
them when it comes to 2018.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I have a feeling
this may not be the last
time we have a chance to talk
about this.
(LAUGHTER)
MATT SCHLAPP: Let's hope not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karine
Jean-Pierre, Matt
Schlapp, thank you both.
MATT SCHLAPP: Thank you.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
Thanks, Judy.